welcome to the fourth section of
hands-on continuous integration and
automation with Jenkins in this section
we are going to look at the concept of
pipeline s code we will also explore the
syntax of a Jenkins file and use the
pipeline plug-in as these are the tools
to build pipelines in Jenkins the
practical part of this section is
devoted to build a continuous delivery
pipeline let's start by looking at
pipeline s code in this video we will
learn what pipeline s code means how
pipelines are implemented in Jenkins 2
and what are the benefits of using
pipelines as opposed to standard Jenkins
jobs there is no practical path in this
video but we will soon put into practice
what we learned here in the next videos
of this section let's start with the
concept of pipeline s code when we talk
about pipeline s code we refer to a set
of features which allow to define and
combine job processes using code and to
store this code under version control in
other words Jenkins jobs and their
configurations are defined as code
instead of manual configuration by the
Jenkins graphical user interface this is
particularly useful when the same job
must be applied to multiple branches in
gate or to multiple source repositories
the job is managed and executed in the
same way except for the code upon which
is based to give you an example you may
want to have a CI pipeline that
automatically builds the code for each
branch committed to get this allows to
reduce manual creation and management of
multiple janking jobs just imagine how
many jobs you will need to create if you
were to run a job for each branch
created by developers pipeline is code
full-swing to the general concept of
infrastructure as code that you might
have heard before the idea behind the
infrastructure s code is that IT
infrastructure is managed and
provisioned through code rather than
manual configuration
the main benefit is that IT processes
like provisioning a server or a database
are fully automated and their
configuration can be stored under
version control and repeated on new
machine yeah I'm giving you some
examples of typical pipelines in general
any process that combines multiple steps
and dependencies between them can be
considered as a candidate for a pipeline
as we mentioned before you can build a
CI pipeline working on multiple branches
and repositories or you can implement a
continuous delivery pipeline that
deploys code to multiple environments
testing staging and production another
popular use of pipelines is to execute
data processing these are typically
called the ETL pipelines from the
acronym extract transform and load a use
case that is gaining popularity is an
event-driven workflow where a pipeline
is started based on an event for example
a new image is uploaded by a user Bill
promotion is another example that
combines multiple stages such as build
test and generating artifacts and
documentation to be promoted to a
storage repository finally any process
requiring conditional processing and
dependencies between steps is also a
good candidate for a pipeline
implementation here is a visual example
taken from the Jenkins website of how a
pipeline might look like in particular
this is a CD pipeline that builds tests
and deploys code through multiple stages
from development to production now let's
look at how pipelines are implemented in
Jenkins before Jenkins - building a
pipeline with Jenkins was a bit awkward
and required multiple plugins and
complex dependencies between jobs
Jenkins - introduced the pipeline plugin
previously known as workflow and several
features making pipelines first-class
citizens in Jenkins in particular
pipelines are implemented through a
jenkins file that
typically stood at the root of your
source control repository we will cover
Jenkins files in the next video the
Jenkins file is written using a
domain-specific language based on groovy
which is a scripting language for the
Java Virtual Machine JVM code written in
groovy could also be stored in libraries
that can be shared across different
pipelines finally the whole pipeline can
be visualized in real time using a
staged view automatically generated from
the Jenkins file this is an example of
staged view for a simple CD pipeline
this gives a high level view of the
process and they found this particularly
useful for explaining to non-technical
people what the pipeline is doing at
which stage it is or where it broke
which benefits to pipeline spring over
standard Jenkins jobs first pipelines
are Express s code and can therefore be
stored under version control like any
other script their resilience is higher
since they can survive a Jenkins restart
and they can be rebuilt from a previous
stage pipelines can also be posed and
wait for a manual approval this is
useful if the business needs to give a
go-ahead before a promotion or
deployment to production pipelines are
also very versatile and can support
complex requirements like loops
conditional and matrix processing and
parallelization of jobs they can also be
extended via domain-specific language
scripts and shared libraries written in
groovy finally pipeline can be
visualized for the benefit of both
technical and non-technical people this
is the end of this video where we
describe the concept of pipeline s code
and explain its benefits and general
implementation in Jenkins to watch the
next video where we will dive into the
structure and syntax of a Jenkins file